---
layout: page
title: Tool Definitions 1.16-1.18
description: Tool definitions are a JSON format defined by Tinkers' Construct to assign behaviors to tools. This page covers the format of tool definitions between 1.16 and 1.18.
---
<div class="hatnote" markdown=1>
This page is about the JSON defining a tool properties from 1.16 to 1.18.2. For the format since 1.19, see [Tool Definitions](..). For the recipes defining tool crafting, see [Tool Recipes](../../recipes/tools).
</div>

{{page.description}}

Tool definitions are located under `data/<domain>/tinkering/tool_definitions/<name>.json` for the [tool definition ID](/docs/json/basic-types#resource-location) `<domain>:<name>`.

{% include toc.html %}

## Format

A tool definition has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} The root tool definition object.
    * {% include field.html name="parts" type="list" %} List of tool parts for each material index. Order determines the order of materials in all relevant contexts. If unset, tool will have no parts (which is either required or disallowed based on the tool's [stat provider](#stat-providers)).
        * {% include field.html type="object" %} A part requirement.
            * {% include field.html name="item" type="item ID" %} Tool part item for the index, must implement `IToolPart` and have a valid stat type for the tool's [stat provider](#stat-providers). May not be set alongside `stat`.
            * {% include field.html name="stat" type="stat type ID" %} Stat type for the index, must be valid for the tool's [stat provider](#stat-providers). May not be set alongside `part`.
            * {% include field.html name="weight" type="integer" %} Weight of the part, used when there are multiple parts of the same type for a weighted average. If unset, defaults to 1.
    * {% include field.html name="stats" type="object" %} Sets the base stats and multipliers for the tool. If unset, tool uses default values for all base stats and 1.0 multipliers.
        * {% include field.html name="base" type="object" %} Mapping from [tool stat IDs](../tool-stats) to the value to set for that stat. If unset, tool uses default values for all base stats.
            * {% include field.html name="\<tool_stat\>" type="any" %} Sets the value for `<tool_stat>` to the given value. JSON type is determined by the stat.
        * {% include field.html name="multipliers" type="object" %} Mapping from [numeric tool stat IDs](../tool-stats#numeric-tool-stats) to the multiplier value.
            * {% include field.html name="\<tool_stat\>" type="number" %} Sets the multiplier for `<tool_stat>` to the given value.
    * {% include field.html name="slots" type="Slot Count" %} Starting modifier slots for this tool. If unset, the tool has no starting slots.
        * {% include field.html name="\<slot\>" type="integer" %} Number of slots added of the [slot type](/docs/json/slot-types) `<slot>`.
    * {% include field.html name="traits" type="list" %} List of starting tool traits. If unset, defaults to an empty list.
        * {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool trait.
            * {% include field.html name="name" type="Modifier ID" %} Modifier to apply as a trait.
            * {% include field.html name="level" type="integer" %} Level of the modifier to apply. If unset, defaults to 1.
    * {% include field.html name="tool_actions" type="list" %} Since 1.18, set of tool actions which may be performed by this tool. If unset, defaults to an empty list.
        * {% include field.html type="Tool Action" %} A tool action which may be performed by this tool.
    * {% include field.html name="harvest" type="object" %} Since 1.18, sets various properties related to using the tool has a harvest tool. If unset, the tool uses default harvest logic and no AOE iterator.
        * {% include field.html name="logic" type="Harvest Logic" link="#harvest-logic" %} Determines the effective blocks for the tool along with additional mining speed bonuses. If unset, uses default harvest logic.
            * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The [harvest logic](#harvest-logic) type.
            * *Any other fields defined by the harvest logic type*.
        * {% include field.html name="aoe" type="object" %} Determines the shape of AOE mining on the tool. If unset, the tool has no AOE mining.
            * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The [AOE iterator](#aoe-iterator) type.
            * *Any other fields defined by the AOE iterator type*.
    * {% include field.html name="attack" type="Weapon Attack" link="#weapon-attacks" %} Since 1.18, determines the shape of AOE mining on the tool. If unset, the tool has no AOE mining.
        * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The [weapon attack](#weapon-attacks) type.
        * *Any other fields defined by the weapon attack type*.
    * {% include field.html name="modules" type="object" %} Since 1.18.2, map of additional [tool hook ID](#tool-hooks) to a [tool module](#tool-modules) implementing that hook. If unset, tool implements no additional hooks.
        * {% include field.html name="\<tool_hook\>" type="object" %} Module implementing the [tool hook](#tool-hooks) `<tool_hook>`.
            * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The [tool module](#tool-modules) type.
            * *Any other fields defined by the tool module type*.
</div>

## Stat Providers

All tools must have a stat provider, which determines which tool parts are allowed and required, and how those parts are used to compute stats. Stat providers are defined in Java, meaning they cannot be configured for a given tool. The following stat providers are valid for tools requesting a stat provider:

* **`tconstruct:no_parts`**: Stat provider for a tool with no tool parts. Will cause the tool definition to error if the parts array has any values.
* **`tconstruct:melee_harvest`**: Stat provider for melee weapons and harvest tools. Requires one or more parts of stat type `tconstruct:head`, and also supports stat types `tconstruct:handle` and `tconstruct:extra`. See [Melee/Harvest Stat Type](/docs/json/stat-types/1.18#meleeharvest) for more info.
* **`tconstruct:ranged`**: Since 1.18.2, stat provider for ranged weapons such as bows. Requires one or more parts of stat type `tconstruct:limb`, and also supports stat types `tconstruct:grip` and `tconstruct:bowstring`. See [Ranged Stat Type](/docs/json/stat-types/1.18#ranged) for more info.

In addition, the following stat providers are used but not registered (meaning they are not available to [JSON Things](/docs/json/json-things/1.18)):

* **Skull Stats**: Stat provider for slime skulls. Requires one or more parts of stat type `tconstruct:skull`. See [Skull Stat Type](/docs/json/stat-types/1.18#skull) for more info.

## Harvest Logic
<div class="hatnote">Since 1.18</div>

Harvest logic determines which blocks a tool is effective on, additional modifiers to tool mining speed, and the maximum tier a tool may harvest. Tool harvest logic has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A harvest logic object. 
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The harvest logic type.
    * *Any other fields defined by the harvest logic type*.
</div>

The following subsections describe the formats for specific harvest logic types.

### Effective Tag

Tag harvest logic defines the most common form of harvest logic using a tag to describe effective blocks. It has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A harvest logic object. 
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:effective_tag`.
    * {% include field.html name="tag" type="Block tag" %} Block tag containing the blocks this tool is effective on.
</div>

### Modified Tag

The modified tag harvest logic defines harvest logic that is effective on a given tag, but also has additional mining speed modifiers to specific blocks. It is notably used by the mattock to allow mining some blocks that are not marked as effective a bit faster. It has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A harvest logic object. 
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:modified_tag`.
    * {% include field.html name="tag" type="Block tag" %} Block tag containing the blocks this tool is effective on.
    * {% include field.html name="modifiers" type="list" %} List of mining speed modifiers to apply.
        * {% include field.html name="modifier" type="float" %} Multiplier to mining speed for any blocks matching the block predicate.
        * {% include field.html name="predicate" type="Block Predicate" %} Block predicate determining the blocks affected by this modifier. Uses the legacy Tinkers' Construct block predicate.
</div>

### Fixed Tier

The fixed tier harvest logic defines harvest logic that is effective on a given tag, but cannot mine above the listed [mining tier](/docs/json/tool-stats#mining-tier). It is notably used by the pickadze to limit the mining tier to gold. It has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A harvest logic object. 
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:fixed_tier`.
    * {% include field.html name="tag" type="Block tag" %} Block tag containing the blocks this tool is effective on.
    * {% include field.html name="tier" type="Mining Tier" %} Maximum mining tier for this tool.
</div>

## AOE Iterators
<div class="hatnote">Since 1.18</div>

AOE iterators implement different shapes of multi-block harvest on tools, including with how they expand when the expander modifier is applied. They have the following base format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A AOE iterator object. 
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The AOE iterator type.
    * *Any other fields defined by the AOE iterator type*.
</div>

The following subsections describe the formats for specific AOE iterator types.

### Box AOE Iterator

The box AOE iterator defines tool AOE in a cube, with the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:box`.
    * {% include field.html name="bonus" type="object" %} Box size expansion applied when the tool has no expanders.
        * {% include field.html name="width" type="integer" %} Base box width radius, defaults to 0.
        * {% include field.html name="height" type="integer" %} Base box height radius, defaults to 0.
        * {% include field.html name="depth" type="integer" %} Base box depth, defaults to 0.
    * {% include field.html name="expansions" type="list" %} List of expansions to apply at each level. If the level exceeds the list size, will cycle through the list again. For example, if the list size is 2 and the level is 3, the first expansion is applied twice and the second once.
        * {% include field.html type="object" %} Box size expansion for a level.
            * {% include field.html name="width" type="integer" %} Level box width radius, defaults to 0.
            * {% include field.html name="height" type="integer" %} Level box height radius, defaults to 0.
            * {% include field.html name="depth" type="integer" %} Level box depth, defaults to 0.
    * {% include field.html name="expansion_direction" type="resource location" %} Determines how `width`, `height`, and `depth` are oriented with respect to the player's position and targeted block. By default, the following options exist:
        * **`tconstruct:side_hit`**: Orients based on the targeted block face. `width` is to the left/right of the target, `height` is above/below the target, and `depth` back behind the target.
        * **`tconstruct:pitch`**: Orients based on the direction the player is facing. `width` is to the left/right of the player view, `height` is above/below the player view, and `depth` back behind the player view.
        * **`tconstruct:height`**: Orients height to the Y axis, `width` to the left/right of the side hit, and `depth` behind the target. When targeting the top or bottom of a  block, `width` orients to the left/right of the player view, and `depth` behind the player view.
</div>

### Circle AOE Iterator

The circle AOE iterator defines tool AOE in a radius around the targeted block, with the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:circle`.
    * {% include field.html name="diameter" type="string" %} Base diameter, summed with the expander value for the total size.
    * {% include field.html name="3D" type="boolean" %} If true, AOE area will be a 3D half sphere. If false (default), will be a circle.
</div>

### Tree AOE Iterator

The tree AOE iterator defines tool AOE that targets all matching logs in a tree. It has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:tree`.
    * {% include field.html name="width_bonus" type="integer" %} Bonus width radius applied at level 0, defaults to 0. Every other level starting with the first increases width by 1.
    * {% include field.html name="depth_bonus" type="integer" %} Bonus depth applied at level 0, defaults to 0. Every other level starting with the second increases depth by 1.
</div>

### Veining AOE Iterator

The veining AOE iterator defines tool AOE that targets all matching connected blocks up to a given recursion depth. 

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:vein`.
    * {% include field.html name="max_distance" type="integer" %} Maximum distance from the targeted block through matching blocks to include, defaults to 0. Summed with the expander level.
</div>

### Fallback AOE Iterator

The fallback AOE iterator nests two AOE iterators, using the first if the targeted block matches the given predicate, or the fallback if it does not match the predicate. It has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:fallback`.
    * {% include field.html name="tag" type="Block Tag" %} Block tag to check.
    * {% include field.html name="if_matches" type="AOE Iterator" link="#aoe-iterators" %} Iterator to run if `tag` matches the targeted block.
    * {% include field.html name="fallback" type="AOE Iterator" link="#aoe-iterators" %} Iterator to run if `tag` does not match the targeted block.
</div>

## Weapon Attacks
<div class="hatnote">Since 1.18</div>

Weapon attacks implement additional behavior that runs after attacking with the tool. They have the following base format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A weapon attack object. 
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The weapon attack type.
    * *Any other fields defined by the weapon attack type*.
</div>

The following subsections describe the formats for specific weapon attack types.

### Particle Weapon Attack

The particle weapon attack module defines a particle to display whenever attacking with this weapon while fully charged. It has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:particle`.
    * {% include field.html name="particle" type="particle ID" %} Particle to display on fully charged attacks. Must be a `SimpleParticleType`.
</div>

### Circle Weapon Attack

The circle weapon attack defines an AOE attack centered on the target when the weapon is fully charged. All targets will be targeted by a full attack, meaning modifiers will apply to each target separately but more durability is consumed.

The circle weapon attack has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:circle`.
    * {% include field.html name="diameter" type="float" %} Range from the original target to also hit with the attack, defaults to 0. The expander level will add to this range.
</div>

### Sweep Weapon Attack

The sweep weapon attack grants a tool a sweeping attack, similar to the vanilla sword's sweep attack. The attack AOE is centered on the attacker, and all targets are dealt damage based damage dealt to the main target scaled by the level of sweeping edge. Modifiers are not applied to additional target, and conditional damage such a smite only considers the primary target.

The sweep weapon attack has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:sweep`.
    * {% include field.html name="range" type="float" %} Range from the attacker to perform the sweep attack, defaults to 0. The expander level will be added to this range.
</div>

## Tool Hooks
<div class="hatnote">Since 1.18.2</div>

Tool hooks are used to define additional behaviors on a tool beyond those covered in the default serializer. The following tool hooks exist:

* **`tconstruct:tool_interaction`**: Hook defining whether a given interaction modifier is allowed to run on the tool. Used to control whether interaction modifiers run on "attack" or "interact" for tools that support multiple methods of interaction, or to ensure only blocking runs on "interact" on shields.

The reason there is only a single tool hook is because the system was implemented to allow flexability in addons, with the intention of eventually migrating tool type specific behaviors such as attack or harvest to tool hooks. This migration was ultimately completed [in 1.19](..#tool-hooks).

## Tool Modules
<div class="hatnote">Since 1.18.2</div>

Tool modules are used to implement tool hooks. Unlike [the system](..#tool-modules) that would eventually come to 1.19, tool modules in 1.18 may only implement a single hook. They have the following base format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object. 
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} The tool module type.
    * *Any other fields defined by the tool module type*.
</div>

The following subsections describe the format for specific tool modules.

### Dual Interaction

The dual interaction module implements the `tconstruct:tool_interaction` hook for a tool that can interact on both "attack" (left click) and "interact" (right click). By default, all interaction modifiers will run on "interact" with this hook, but any modifiers defined in the tool's persistent data set `tconstruct:attack_modifiers` will trigger on attack instead. Modifiers are added to that set using the [modifier set recipe](../recipes/worktable#modifier-set).

The dual interaction module has a type of `tconstruct:dual_option_interaction`, and no additional fields.

### Preference Set Interaction

The preference set interaction module implements the `tconstruct:interaction` hook for a tool that can interact on both "attack" (left click) and "interact" (right click). This module defines a set of modifiers which interact on one source, and all modifiers outside that set interact on the other source. It is notably used on shields, which set "interact" to the blocking modifier, and run all other interaction modifiers on left click.

The preference set interaction module has the following format:

<div class="treeview" markdown=1>
* {% include field.html type="object" %} A tool module object.
    * {% include field.html name="type" type="resource location" %} Always `tconstruct:preference_set_interaction`.
    * {% include field.html name="preferred_modifiers" type="modifier predicate" %} Predicate matching modifiers to put on `preferred_source`. Any modifiers that don't match the predicate will interact on the other source.
    * {% include field.html name="preferred_source" type="string" %} Interaction source to use for `preferred_modifiers`. May be `right_click` (for interact) or `left_click` (for attack).
</div>