---
layout: post
title:  "Tinkers' Construct 1.19.2 Update"
date:   2024-04-02 12:00:00 -0400
categories: posts
author: KnightMiner
image_root: updates/tinkers/1.19.2
---

This build is still an alpha release. This means 3 things:

* While we have tested it, it could always have bugs we have missed. Make backups of any worlds you care about.
* If you are making addons, know we make no guarantees about API stability during alpha. Once a beta release is made the API will remain stable.
* Since there will inevitably be bugs, we ask that you do not include this build in a modpack unless you plan to continue supporting 1.19.2 until we get a beta out. We have had modpacks include our alpha builds then abandon the pack causing users to come to us with issues we fixed over a year ago in the past.

We plan to stick around on 1.19 long enough to get the version stable and to add the next few features from our roadmap before moving onto 1.20.

Now that the boring stuff is out of the way, lets talk about what is new for this version!

*This blog was originally posted [on Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/tinkersconstruct/comments/1bui0b8/tinkers_construct_3_is_now_out_for_1192/). It has been copied over for the sake of preserving our update history.*

{% include toc.html %}

{% include update/start.html %}

## General

{% include update/image.html name="frogs" alt="Frogs on a slime island." %}

Being updated to 1.19 means we take advantage of new forge and vanilla features, such as making mangrove a new wood variant. This also makes worldgen such as ores, geodes, and islands a lot more stable which should increase compatibility with worldgen datapacks. Slime islands are also fully controlled by datapacks now, so its easy to add your own island variants!

We will look into other new 1.19 content in later builds, such as the deep dark and sculk.

## Enderbark

{% include update/image.html name="enderslime-island" alt="Enderbark trees on an enderslime island." %}

One of the cool new 1.19 features is mangrove trees. My first thought on seeing them is that the tree would fit perfect in an alien world, which provided exactly what I was looking for to make enderslime island trees unique.

Like mangrove, enderbark leaves do not drop saplings, instead saplings grow from the leaves. They also grow extensive roots, which can grow through congealed slime producing slimy enderbark roots.

{% include update/image.html name="enderbark-planks" alt="Enderbark wood." %}

Enderbark produces a unique wood variant which has black logs and planks that mix black with pink highlights. This works as a variant for slimewood, and is the new requirement for enderslime staffs.

## Staff Visuals

{% include update/image.html name="staff-visuals" alt="Embellished and dyed staffs." %}

Speaking of staffs, they now use wood for embellishments instead of metal, which lets you change the texture of the handle to any wood, slimewood, or nahuatl variant. Dye instead of affecting the handles now changes the color of the crystal on top, allowing you to customize the crystals to match your staff abilities.

## Magma Embellishment

{% include update/image.html name="magma-embellishment" alt="Magma embellishments on the slime suit." %}

Magma is a new embellishment type for the slime suit. It leans into magma blocks rather than magma cream for the appearance, and fits nicely alongside the clay embellishment.

## Blood Rework

{% include update/image.html name="meat-soup" alt="Melting a cow to make meat soup." %}

Back in 1.7, Tinkers' Construct added blood as an easier to obtain alternative to slime with some long term future plans. Tinkers' Construct 2 added more slime variants and Tinkers' Construct 3 added more ways to obtain said variants, so a slime substitute was less necessary. In addition, other uses for blood was hard as its obtaining made it both cheap and hard to find uses for. Thus, we opted to remove blood from the mod. Note this does not affect bloodshrooms, the foliage, just liquid blood.

Melting farm animals now produces meat soup, this leans into the aspect of blood as a food without fewer health and cultural taboos with consuming it (especially as you know it won't come from zombies which no one wants to eat). Meat soup is used in the creation of pig iron.

The default for melting mobs is now liquid soul, an existing fluid from melting soul sand that is used in the creation of soul glass. This fluid is about as cheap as blood was once you have nether access, and gives us potential to lean into the mob farm side of blood usage.

## Venombone

{% include update/image.html name="venombone" alt="Venombone tools and tool parts in JEI." %}

In addition to pig iron, blood was used to create bloodbone, a tier 2 melee material. This material has been replaced with venombone, which is created by pouring venom on bones, giving another use for that existing fluid. The stats are the same as bloodbone, but its trait boosts damage when you are poisoned instead.

Raging (bloodbones old trait that boosted damage at low health) will likely get reused for one of the future tool materials.

## Terracube and Earthslime tweaks

{% include update/image.html name="terracubes" alt="A terracube wearing a helmet." %}

Due to a new forge feature, we no longer needed the earthslime mob. In case you were unaware, earthslimes were a clone of vanilla slimes for the sake of letting them spawn on islands; the new forge feature lets us spawn vanilla slimes on the island.

Since we liked the feature where they spawned with vanilla helmets, we moved that feature to terracubes. Other slime types (sky and ender) are unaffected by this change.

## Smeltery Tweaks

{% include update/image.html name="smeltery" alt="New look of ducts." %}

Ducts (the filtered drain) now are crafted from gold instead of cobalt. This makes them easier to obtain, and also frees up cobalt for its usage in our upcoming plans for the third smeltery variant, the sublimery.

In addition, seared blocks in the smeltery no longer have a block entity unless they are part of the smeltery, which should reduce world load times when they are used decoratively.

{% include update/end.html %}

## Download

### Tinkers' Construct

The 3.8.0.14 update can be downloaded from all the usual places, including:

{% include update/download.html name="tinkers-construct" github="TinkersConstruct" version="3.8.0.14" curseforge="5231462" %}

### Mantle

Requires a Mantle update to 1.10.23, download from:

{% include update/download.html name="mantle" version="1.10.23" curseforge="5228513" %}

