---
layout: post
title:  "Tinkers' Construct 3.11.0 Changelog"
date:   2025-12-23 19:00:00 -0400
categories: posts
author: KnightMiner
---

This post contains the complete changelog for Tinkers' Construct 3.11.0, as it was too long to simply put on GitHub release as we typically do.

{% include toc.html %}

# Additions

## Knightmetal

* Added knightmetal as a end metal.
* Can be melted using blazing blood and casted into tools.
    * On melee tools and bows, its trait is valiant, which boosts damage against armored targets (based on number of pieces worn).
    * On armor, its trait is stalwart, which reduces damage from armed targets (based on items in either hand).
* Can be obtained from enderslimes.
    * Enderslimes have a chance to spawn with a knightmetal core, which makes them drop knightmetal shards instead of enderslime.
    * Enderslimes helmet spawns are now either knightmetal goggles or knightmetal plate helmets, which can be recycled for the metal.
* Can be found in enderslime geodes.
    * Knightmetal shards have a chance to replace enderslime crystal clusters.
    * Knightmetal does not regrow in the geode, it is only found on worldgen.
* Also available in the Twilight Forest from knight phantoms.

## Twilight Forest

* In addition to sharing knightmetal with Twilight Forest, this update also adds a lot of compatability for Twilight Forest materials.
* New slotless modifier - embossed. Crafted from a boss trophy, and grants +1 upgrade slot to any tool.
* Twilight Forest enchantments when relevant now have modifiers they map to in the modifier worktable.
* Minotaur axes can be melted into molten gold or molten diamond.
* Fix some modifiable items, tool parts, along with anvils and worktables being able to be "uncrafted" in the uncrafting table, leading to material conversation when materials are involved.

### Ironwood

* New tier 2 material created from ironwood ingots in the part builder.
* Its trait is deciduous, which allows the ironwood tool to share its durability with other tools.
* Whenever the tool loses durability, it will lose a bit extra to give a random tool a bit of barkskin. The higher the level, the more barkskin is gained.
    * For armor, tool is selected from a random armor slot.
    * For held tools, tool is selected from the hotbar or offhand.
* Tools will consume barkskin before durability, similar to overslime.
* Ironwood tools can also be melted in the smeltery or foundry to get molten iron and molten gold.

### Steeleaf

* New tier 3 tool material created from melting down steeleafs.
* Its trait is experienced, boosting the XP obtained from killing monsters and mining blocks; perfect for powering the uncrafting table.
* Trait inspiration is the steeleaf sword starting with looting II. We wanted to lean into the luck aspect without reaching too high levels of looting.
* Molten steeleaf's fluid effect damages the target, plus applies the experienced effect to them. On monsters, this further boosts their XP drops.

### Fiery

* Fiery tears and fiery blood can be dumped into a smeltery drain or tank to obtain fiery liquid.
* Can also be obtained from melting down fiery armor and tools.
* Fiery liquid can be casted on iron to create fiery tool parts, a new tier 4 material.
* Fiery's trait is autosmelt (like the ability modifier). At higher levels, autosmelt will have a chance to duplicate the smelted drop. For modpack makers, there is a tag to blacklist this duplication on specific items if its a problem.
* On armor, its trait is flaming protection, which grants protection against targets that are on fire.
* Fiery's fluid effect is "moltenize". When hitting a block, the block is melted into the appropiate fluid block. While this is powerful as most blocks contain less than 1000mb, fiery is an extremely rare resource.
* Fiery is not available from loot such as ancient tools to avoid a progression skip for Twilight Forest. Other Twilight Forest materials can be found on ancient tools.

### Minotaur Axe

* New ancient tool dropped by minotaurs from the labyrinth.
* Also can be found in the loot chests in minotaur spawner rooms and the minoshroom loot chests.
* Is a combination of a melee weapon and a harvest tool (okay, that is all axes).
* Comes with a unique trait charge attack, which gives you +7 damage when attacking while sprinting, just like the Twilight Forest axes.
* Comes with two tool heads and a tool handle.

## Fishing Rods

* New small ranged weapon, crafted from a bow limb, bowstring, and arrow head.
    * Can be used for fishing! Give it lure or luck.
    * Also can be used as a weapon, damaging monsters when reeled in at the cost of more rod durability.
    * Ranged stats boost damage, range, and usage speed of the fishing rod.
* Fishing rod modifiers
    * Unique ability modifier - grapple. Turn the rod into a grappling hook, pulling yourself towards reeled blocks.
    * Unique upgrade modifier - collecting. Allows the fishing rod to collect thrown tools, arrows, items, and alike.
    * Can receive channeling for a chance of lightning based on the weather.
    * Works with spilling and melting, for ranged fluid shenanigans.
    * Interaction modifiers run on left click, and if you wish you can toggle the fishing function to left click as well.

## Throwing

* New throwing ability modifier lets you throw tools as a projectile.
    * Works like tridents: holding right click and releasing throws the tool, causing it to leave the inventory.
    * Hitting a mob deals damage using melee stats, though notably does not apply melee attributes.
    * Hitting a block will break it if effective and it has enough mining speed.
    * On bows, will only be thrown if out of ammo.
* Added javelins, a new broad tool that starts with throwing.
    * Crafted using a mix of melee parts and ranged parts.
* Ballista is a new longbow modifier to fire tools.
    * Can fire melee or harvest tools from the offhand as if it were thrown.
    * Multiplies the melee damage and mining speed by bow velocity.
* Several modifiers affect thrown or fired tools:
    * Returning modifier causes a thrown tool to return after hitting. Works like trident loyalty.
    * The channeling modifier can be used for a chance of lightning on hit based on the weather.
    * The fins modifier lets the tool move freely underwater, like tridents. It also removes the underwater mining speed penalty for thrown harvest tools.
    * The magnetic modifier lets the tool attract nearby items. At high enough levels, it can even pull mined drops with it when it returns to you.

## Ammo

* Tinkers' ammo has returned from 1.12, including arrows, shurikens, and throwing axes.
* Key design:
    * Does not use durability for ammo. Instead, each ammo is single use, and you craft several at a time.
    * Limited modifier recipes; majority of behavior comes from material traits.
    * Has projectile power, accuracy, and velocity stats.
* Arrow parts:
    * All are made in the part builder, no casting.
    * Can use the gold arrow pattern in the part builder to reduce pattern costs.
    * Support part swapping on stacks of up to the crafted amount. Note trait may change stack sizes.
* Limited modifier recipes:
    * Have no upgrade or ability slots.
    * Can receive soulbound through a slotless recipe from sculk veins.
    * Redirected modifier from dragon's breath boosts the level of the first head trait.
    * Arrows can be dyed.
* All ammo types can be shot from dispensers.

### Arrow heads

* All ammo has 1 or more arrow heads.
* Some arrow heads boost power:
    * Quartz gives a flat power boost.
    * Amethyst, dragon scale, and knightly: does bonus damage if the conditions are met.
* Many have special effects:
    * Prismarine: works better underwater.
    * Gunpowder: makes the arrow explode with damage based on power.
    * Glowstone: places a light source and makes the target glow.
    * Earthslime & skyslime: changes knockback of the projectile.
    * Ichor: makes the projectile bounce off walls.
    * Enderslime and ender pearl: teleports.
    * Magnetite: pulls in nearby mobs.
* Some arrow heads allow additional modification:
    * Flint: allows casting potions for potion effects. Better than tipped arrows.
    * Glass: can be filled with molten liquids for fluid effects, like spitting or spilling.
* Shulker shell makes the projectile reusable.
* Many material more options described in the books.

### Arrow shafts

* Arrows and throwing axes have an arrow shaft.
* Grant many different special effects:
    * Wood: gives you more arrows.
    * Bamboo: gives the arrow perfect accuracy, while throwing axes get more velocity.
    * Bone: gives the arrow piercing, and lets throwing axes disable shields.
    * Chorus: stops the target from teleporting.
    * Slimewood: makes the arrow bounce.
    * Blazewood: makes the target glow.
    * Venombone, blazing bone: lowers target defense.
    * Blaze: lights the target on fire.
    * Necrotic bone: heals you.
    * End rod: ignores gravity for a second after firing.
    * And more!

### Arrows

* Ammo type fired from bows and crossbows (even vanilla bows).
* Arrow stats and modifiers combine with bow stats and modifiers for even more combinations.
* Created from an arrow head, an arrow shaft, and an arrow fletching.
* Fletchings provide mainly negative traits:
    * Feather provide no downside.
    * Leaves reduces arrows crafted.
    * Slime reduces arrow accuracy.
    * Paper reduces arrow power.
    * Magma makes the arrow disappear after half a second. 
* Fletchers may give out random arrows as hero of the village gifts.
* Vanilla arrows and tipped arrows can be transformed into a Tinkers' equivelent using a tinker station or anvil.

### Thrown ammo

* Shurikens are crafted from two arrow heads. They have more accuracy and velocity.
* Throwing axes are crafted from an arrow head and an arrow shaft. They deal more damage.
* Thrown ammo is used on right click to deal quick damage and knockback.
* Stacks to 16.

## Sleeves modifier

* New chestplate upgrade for throwing things.
* Gives 3 slots per level that can be filled with throwable items:
    * Throwing weapons: shurikens and throwing axes.
    * Potions: splash and lingering.
    * Special items: ender pearls, eyes of ender, and fireworks.
* Right clicking with an empty hand will throw the selected item.
* Sneaking while right clicking will toggle the selected item. Will also toggle if the selected slot is empty.
* Perfect for getting around stack size restrictions on throwable items, or just a surprise ranged attack.

## Minimap modifier

* New helmet modifier that adds 3 slots for maps in your helmet.
* Can swap the active map using the helmet keybind.
* Active map will be displayed in the UI while wearing the helmet, and will also be explored as you move.
* The item frame modifier was boosted from 1 slot per level to 3 to match this new modifier.

## Drill Attack modifier

* Ability modifier that improves flinging, springing, or grapple.
* Causes you to perform a spin attack along the trajectory of the movement ability.
* First mob you collide with will be the target of a melee attack from your main hand.
* Works a lot like a riptide trident.

## New armor materials

* Maille:
    * Dragon scale grants dragonborn.
    * Shulker shell grants shulking.
* Shield cores:
    * Bone temporarily lowers the attacker's armor.
    * Venombone temporarily lowers the attacker's defense from magic.
    * Blazing bone temporarily lowers the attacker's defense from fire.
    * Necrotic bone restores some health over time based on the attack strength.
    * Necronium is a new compat material, applying wither to yourself and the attacker.

## Tool Recycling

* The part builder can now be used to recycle many vanilla style tools.
* To recycle a tool, place it in the material slot, and place a bottle of venom in the pattern slot.
* Recyclables:
  * Wood or stone tools can be recycled into cobblestone or sticks respectively.
  * For tools made of multiple materials like bows, crossbows, fishing rods, or flint and steel, you can select which material to salvage.
  * Can also be used to recycle tools from twilight forest made of materials like ironwood, naga scale, or fur.
  * Does not work on metal tools such as iron or gold, those must be recycled in the smeltery as before.
* As part of this change, recycling tinker tools in the part builder now costs venom instead of wood patterns.


# Changes

## Materials

* Tweak stats of treated wood to better suit its cost. Internally we are calling it "tier 1.5" as despite its mid game appearance its a little cheap to be as strong as some tier 2 materials.
* Moved ice to tier 3.
* Skyslime vine bowstrings now boosts velocity instead of accuracy.
* Nahuatl now costs 1 pane per plank instead of 1 block (quarter obsidian cost).
* Blazewood shield cores now cause the target to glow instead of the generally weak on fire protection.
* Tweak the behavior of nahuatl shield cores so blocking boosts the application chance.
* Bone now grants +2 armor pierce per level instead of +1, and the pierce sticks around for around 5 seconds instead of just the single attack.
* Debris nuggets now craft into netherite scrap and vice versa.
* Added calcite stone variant, same textures as diorite.
* Andesite no longer has unique textures as they were just worse looking stone. Material variant still exists but it just affects name.
* Deepslate is now a flint variant instead of a stone variant.
* Tweak scorched stone material textures.
* Fix armor model not displaying material luminosity.
* Fix aluminum not supporting repairing using aluminum ingots, nuggets, and blocks.
* Fix dense using the wrong repair formula (#5485)

### Steel from skyslimes

* Skyslimes now have a chance to spawn with a steel core, which makes them drop steel shards instead of skyslime.
* Skyslime armor now has a chance to be steel goggles instead of just steel plate helmets.
* Skyslime geodes now have a chance to spawn with steel shard clusters replacing some skyslime crystal clusters. They will not regrow after breaking.

### Electrum shock

* Electrum's trait was changed from experienced to shock.
* Shock on melee weapons and bows boosts damage against targets in water.
* On armor, shock adds a high chance to damage attackers in water.

### Tungsten and platinum removal

* Tungsten and platinum are no longer supported as compatability materials.
  * We felt too few mods added apart from those adding many other ores, thus causing them to most often remain unavailable.
  * This was also largely done as the traits for platinum and invar were pretty uninteresting by comparison.
* Platinum's traits are unused as a result of this. Any platinum tools are automatically migrated to seared stone.
* Tungsten's trait was mostly moved to lead, which now grants bonus mining speed instead of bonus damage making it a harvest material.
* Invar's trait now boosts your attack damage at the cost of being heavy (instead of biome conditions). On melee and ranged weapons, this is the replacement for lead's old trait, while it received a new protection based trait for armor.
* The melting/casting and molten metals for both platinum and tungsten remain unchanged.
* If you create a modpack or addon that requires these, we created a quick lowcode mod to reenable this functionality.
  * We do not plain to maintain this mod (hence not publishing it); we encourage modpacks and addons that need it to simply incorporate.
  * We encourage non-addon mods adding either metal to add their own dedicated compatability that integrates with their mod mechanics instead.

## Tools

* Travelers gear can now be crafted using "composite" material ingots instead of just casting material ingots.
* Added a sound effect on using a repair kit via right clicking a tool.
* Improve display of tools charging up animation, making it better match the tool drawspeed.
* Zombie slimeskull is now repaired with leather instead of rotten flesh.
* Make slimy planks no longer mineable with axes; they were intended to only allow shovels (#5514).
* Make swords, cleavers, and javelins have a slightly higher block stat when given blocking.
* Drowned swashers now have a tag that determines the fluids they can spawn with, by default including lava, powdered snow, molten glass, and molten obsidian.
* Fix crossbows and bows running harvest logic, leading to some odd modifier interactions on a tool with no effective blocks.
* Fix bows and crossbows running some right click modifier hooks when they shouldn't.
* Fix scythe AOE not working on many plants such as grass.
* Fix block break event firing twice using tinker tools, causing double interactions with mods like Twilight Forest.
* Fix some bow/arrow modifiers running when target blocked the arrow.

### Monsters using Modifiers

* Monsters holding Tinkers' melee weapons can now use melee modifiers.
* Modifiers such as fiery, scorching, lacerating, and necrotic now apply their effects on behalf of the monster holding the tool.
* Works using two new modifier hooks, allowing addons to opt-in after they verified their logic will work for non-players. Existing JSON modules opt-in when relevant.
* For the sake of addons with monsters that have full player-like ability to use Tinkers' tools, we added a tag blacklist to disable the behavior on your mob.
* For the sake of modifiers that apply effects on hit, added a tag to blacklist damage sources from applying this.
* For the sake of unexpected edge cases or addons that implemented this in a different way, we added a config option to disable this functionality.

### Modifier slot rebalance

* The current list of extra modifier slots has not changed since we added them in 1.16, apart from the addition of rebalanced. Revisiting them made us decide to make a few tweaks.
* End crystals are now used for rebalanced instead of resurrected, replacing the dragon scales/gilded blackstone. This is a bit more thematic, and better suituates rebalanced as a nether modifier.
* Replacing resurrected as the 4th +1 upgrade slot modifier is forecast, crafted from an ore block of diamond, emerald, or cobalt (requires silk touch to obtain).
* Gilded now requires gilded blackstone instead of a golden apple.
* Draconic's scale crafting recipe now uses dragon's breath instead of wither roses.
* Overall, this adds a new focus (mining) to granting an extra upgrade slot, replacing one of the two granted from combat. It also removes the weirdness of two inconsitent recipes for rebalanced and draconic.

### Modifiers

* Disallow trick quiver on war picks, since they can't swap the trick arrow choice. Bulk quiver is accessible by right clicking in an inventory.
* Item frame modifier now automatically offsets display when placed in the top right and potion effects are applied.
* Sweeping edge now costs fewer chains.
* Added ender zoology soulbound to the enchantment to modifier mapping.
* Springing modifier now works better when used from the ground.
* Disallow nearsighted and farsighted on non-held non-armor tools. Mostly affects ammo, plus the knapsack from tinkers things.
* Shiny is now crafted using either a nether star or enchanted golden apple (was only enchanted golden apple before).
* Reduce the amount springing pushes you upwards in its movement.
* Improve soulbound's resiliance to unexpected inventory modifications post-mordem from other mods (a.k.a. other people's soulbound implementations).
* Make it easier for addons to apply effects during the bonking bonk.
* Lacerating damage is no longer random. Instead, it gives a flat 2 damage over 2 seconds per level. Additional hits will add to the time instead of resetting it.
* Conducting now grants up to +20% damage, which only requires 10 seconds of being on fire. Compared to up to +15% from 15 seconds before.
* Insatiable now grants +2.5 damage after 5 hits, instead of +2 after 8 hits.
* Long fall is now an upgrade instead of an ability. It also has a new recipe.
* Feather falling now gives 25% per level and caps at 2 levels, which is what is needed for long fall.
* Lightspeed on boots is now capped to 3 levels, as it was just way too fast in practice.
* Fix overworked causing overshield to consume extra overslime.
* Fix shulking not checking that the wearing entity is crouching.
* Fix recipe for splashing not accepting splash bottles from mods such as Inspirations.
* Fix too restrictive AOE behavior for modifiers such as firestarter, pathing, and stripping.
* Fix creative mode use of modifier crystals and creative slots not playing the sound outside the creative inventory.
* Fix pathing displaying the toggled name twice.
* Fix killager not properly working on illagers.
* Fix projectile protection not protecting against `falling_block` damge type (#5525).
* Fix piglin heads not being usable to craft recapitated (#5496).
* Fix broken tools still being able to use glowing (#5532).
* Fix bonking not applying its 150% damage modifier to bonk attacks.
* Fix wrong amount of looting applied from bleeding kills.
* Fix inventory menu modifier module always requiring crouching.

#### Ranged

* Added bounce modifier for longbows: causes arrows to bounce off walls.
* Punch is now limited to 3 levels instead of 5.
* Longbows no longer can receive arrow piercing, since they now have bounce. You can use bone arrows for some pierce.
* Longbows no longer can receive multishot due to ballista.
* Glowing on bows now causes the arrow to place glows at the cost of some bow damage.
* Trick quiver now increases slot count instead of stack size for higher levels. It also skips empty slots when toggling the selected arrow.
* Fix bug where holy might increase arrow damage multiple times (#5499).

### Fluid Effects

* Molten manyullyn now does slightly more bleeding damage.
* Molten hepatizon now does wither instead of resistance, and deals magic damage.
* Molten netherite also now does magic damage.
* Added fluid effects for knightmetal, steeleaf, and fiery. See above for details.
* Fix crash from putting a fluid that damages yourself in wetting pants or bursting chestplate.
* Fix crash from using molten ender in a splashing tool to activate itself (#5471).
* Fix skyslime and earthslime fluid effects potentially moving block entities when mods like Quark are installed (#5472).
* Fix liquid ender having slightly wrong sneaking logic.
* Fix enderslime applying the returning effect twice, granting double time.

### Ancient tools

* War picks now spawn with the trait war charge: while loaded, mining blocks with a war pick will boost the velocity of the next fired arrow.
* War picks now drop from vindicators in addition to zombie villagers as before.
* Melting pans now drop from zombies and zombie villagers in addition to husks as before. They also are added to the offhand (since they are armor), letting some monsters dual wield.
* Swashers now also drop from wither skeletons in addition to drowned as before.
* Melting pans are now given by armorers instead of weaponsmiths for hero of the village gifts.

## Tables

* Pattern crafting recipe now produces 6 instead of 3.
* The part builder UI and modifier worktable UI now has 4 rows of buttons instead of 3.
* The tinker's chest, cast chest, and part chest now have 4 rows of slots instead of 3.
* The tinker station and tinkers anvil UI are slightly taller, making the slots and text field a bit less cramped.
* All tool tables other than the crafting station should have the same UI height as a result of this change.
* Sorting modifiers using a compass in the modifier worktable can go in reverse direction by putting the compass in the opposite slot.
* Tinker station/tinkers anvil now have 6 columns for buttons instead of 5. It also now has buttons for scrolling through buttons if the number of rows exceeds the screen size (thanks @Qikahome!)
* The armor stand preview in the tinker station/tinkers anvil now is hidden if there are too many tool buttons.
* Fixed some bugs related to the button scrollbar not updating in the part builder and modifier worktable.
* Reduce volume and adjust pitch for tinker anvil craft sound.
* Allow part builder part recycling to create multiple parts if the input's cost twice or more exceeds the cost of the recipe. For example, a hammer head will now craft 4 pick heads instead of 1. Useful since part recycling does not have leftovers.
* Fix crash when viewing upgrades for a tool in the tinker station that has two separate copies of a modifier. This happens either due to modifier migration or due to invalid tool NBT.
* Fix crash from part with no casting recipe being used for part recycling.

## Smeltery

* Added seared and scorched lamps. Crafted from glowstone plus the appropiate smeltery stone. Just a smeltery/foundry block that glows.
* Added melting recipes for splash and lingering bottles.
* Cinderslime ingots now work as a beacon payment item.
* Most Twilight Forest tools now have a cooresponding fluid to melt into in the smeltery.
* Molten copper now grants slightly more breath from its fluid effect.
* Molten bronze and molten amethyst bronze now grant/remove a full 5 minutes of time since rest instead of 1.67.
* Increase cost of tipping arrows slightly so as to leave lingering potion recipe relevant. Not that its useful still; our tipped arrows are better.
* Casting water on tipped arrows now turns it into a regular arrow.
* Add support for melting Farmer's Delight knives (#5517).
* Show fluid ID under advanced tooltips for tanks and copper cans.
* Fix smeltery and fluid tanks not darkening the fluid render under the effects of blindness (#4909).
* Fix smeltery drain on chunk border potentially caching an invalid smeltery controller reference.
* Fix smeltery fuel tanks on chunk borders sometimes being removed from the strucutre preventing getting fuel from them.
* Fix dupe bug from filling an empty casting tank with an empty fluid container inside (#5470).
* Fix tanks and lanterns losing their light level on world reload (#5367). Due to the changes needed to fix this bug, it will be necessary to break and replace or update existing tanks after this update for the fix to apply.
* Fix Immersive Engineering steel hoes melting into too many ingots.
* Fix tinker tank not updating comparator output when the item is added or removed (#5516).
* Fix faucets getting stuck when pouring into a tank that accepts something between 11 and 90mb, but does not accept anything between 1 and 10mb. For an example, consider copper cans that allow 90mb exactly but no smaller increments.

### Fluid behaviors

* Molten fluids now flow less far, mimicking lava. Stone flows 3 blocks, metal 2 blocks, gems 1 block, and glass 0 blocks. Additionally, slime now flows slower.
* Fluids now have overlay textures while swimming in them.
* Fluids now render fog while swiming inside, with thick fog in opaque fluids like molten metals, and thin fog in transparent ones like slime.
* Cinderslime and ichor are now placeable in world with a new upsidedown fluid block. The renderer is a little odd however.

### Cosmere compatability

* Added compatability for melting, casting, alloying, and fluid effects for metals from Cosmere inspired mods, such as leafreynolds's [Cosmere](https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/cosmere) and legobmw99's [Allomancy](https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/allomancy).
* Cadmium and chromium are standard ore melting/casting. These metals notably also show up in some IC2 inspired mods, though most of those we won't encounter until 1.21.
    * Cadmium's fluid effect decrease the breath of the target.
    * Chromium's fluid effect applies luck to the target.
    * Both fluids can be used as additional options for casting whitestone. Nickel is also an option now.
* Added support for molten duralumin, alloyed from 3 alumimum and 1 copper for 4. It's fluid effect causes the target to turn invisible.
* Added support for molten bendalloy, alloyed from 2 lead, 1 tin, and 1 cadmium for 4. Its fluid effect gives the target saturation.
* Added alternative recipes for nicrosil:
    * If both chromium and nickel are available, its alloyed from 2 nickel, 1 chromium, and 1 quartz for 4.
    * If only nickel is available, its alloyed from 2 nickel, 1 tin, and 1 quartz for 4.
    * If only chromium is available, its alloyed from 2 chromium, 1 iron, and 1 quartz for 4.
    * If only tin is available, its alloyed from 2 tin, 1 iron, and 1 quartz for 4.
    * The reason this has so many alternative recipes is because Metalborn adds it with no nickel or chromium, and Allomancy adds it with no nickel. Cosmere adds it with both chromium and nickel.
* When both tin and lead are available, pewter is now alloyed from 3 tin plus 1 lead for 4. Previously was 2 tin plus 1 lead for 3. New recipe is a compromise between recipes for Cosmere and Allomancy.
* Metal flakes from Allomancy, along with their raw ore blends (low tech alloying) can be melted.
* Currently, none of these metals are usable as tool materials (unless you count casting whitestone).

### Fake Ingots

* Compatability alloys (bronze, electrum, pewter, etc.) now will have fake ingots and storage blocks added for when the materials are active without having ingots or blocks.
* Primarily happens when the alloy components are present without an addon adding the metal, e.g. someone adds tin but not bronze.
* Fake ingots work in Tinkers' Construct in all ways ingots normally do, including repairing tools and crafting traveler's gear.
* Fake storage blocks in addition to repair can also notably be placed in world and used to craft anvils. They are the first "block tool part".
* They are internally tool parts, meaning each material is just a NBT difference. This prevents other mods from assuming we add bronze and alike when we just have compatability support for it.
* If you need a proper ingot that can be tagged, use a mod that lets you register new items such as Json Things; the fake ingot will automatically disable itself.

## Gadgets

* Enderman heads and slimeskulls now prevent enderman anger.
* Make manyullyn and netherite frames support the 16 rotation states (like diamond) instead of just 8 (like regular item frames).
* Remove recipes for flint and quartz shurikens, replaced with the respective shuriken type. Items and entities will be fully removed in 1.21.
* Remove recipe for glowballs, replaced with glowstone shurikens. Items and entities will be fully removed in 1.21.
* Remove recipe for EFLN, replaced with gunpowder shurikens. Add a level of fins (prismarine) to make it have the underwater explosion. Items and entities will be fully removed in 1.21.

## JEI

* Tool recycling in the part builder also now shows in JEI, for both vanilla and tinker tools.
* Enchantment converting recipes now only list modifiers that have a matching enchantment.
* Enchanted book converting recipe now focus links enchantment types to modifier types.
* Improve JEI compatability with material recipes.
* Fix modifier and tool crafting recipes not showing the tool stack size.
* Fix recipes using empty potion showing in JEI.
* Fix casting category not properly focus linking both fluid display areas.
* Fix JEI hiding catalysts when all variants of a block show. Requires showing the default variants always.

# Technical

* Added a new config option to disable "ingotless alloy integration"
   * By default, Tinkers' Construct will provide alloy material integration if all the components of an alloy are available.
       * For example, invar is available if nickel ore is detected, even if no mod adds invar.
   * This provides more material options, but some players have expressed they dislike the alloys lack ingots and blocks.
   * The new config option makes those materials only enabled if another mod adds the ingots.
   * See also [Fake Ingots](#fake-ingots) for an improvement to these alloys function when enabled.
* Make right clicking armor in inventories fall back to a super call. Fixes it not working with the Quark armor swap feature (#5508).
* Necronium bones repair recipe is now enabled if integration materials are forced. Will improve the index screenshot for the books.
* Bonking now uses persistent data to mark the active bonking boolean, allowing modifiers to query it.
* Fix stackable tools receiving modifiers from a recipe that has a lower max count than the tool's max stack size causing some duplications.
* Fix tool and material models using wrong GUI properties.
* Fix exception when someone calls the `beforeMeleeHit` hook multiple times (#5520).

## Commands

* Added presets for the `/mantle remove_recipes` command.
    * `tconstruct:ingot_smelting` - removes all furnace and blast furnace recipes creating an ingot that is also castable. Ideal for forcing progression through the melter/molten metals.
    * `tconstruct:vanilla_tools` - removes crafting table recipes for vanilla-style tools, even those added by mods. Forces the player use Tinkers' Construct tools. Note this does not change loot tables or monster starting equipment, nor will it affect recipes that might use these tools.
    * `tconstruct:netherite_smithing` - removes smithing table recipes for creating netherite vanilla tools.
    * Note these are entirely opt-in functions, if you are not interested in these particular challenges, don't run the command.
* Added materials and modifier tags to the `/mantle tags` commands.
* Rename `/tconstruct generate_part_textures` to `/tconstruct generate part_textures`
* Improve error logging from the generate part textures command (#5501).

### Generate melting recipes

* New command `/tconstruct generate melting_recipes ...` - creates a datapack in the world folder for generated custom recipes from crafting.
* Works by iterating all recipes of the specified type, then matching up inputs to existing melting recipes.
* Most useful for crafting table recipes, though might be useful for other registries.
* Reimplementation of a function from 1.12 where we would generate recipes based on the crafting table for automated recycling. Instead of manually running it, you now opt-in by running the command then can manually remove recipes you dislike.
* Can be configured using the file `tconstruct:command/generate_melting_recipes.json`. By default, will generate recipes for anything other than modifiable tools, books, dyes, and container items.

## Documentation

* Sections:
    * Added ammo materials section to materials and you, tinkers' gadgetry and the encyclopedia.
    * Added general, ranged, and armor material sections to tinkers' gadgery. This book contains exploration materials from the end and Twilight Forest such as chorus, end stone, and knightmetal.
    * Material section icons now use a relevant tool part instead of an example material item.
    * Rearranged encyclopedia sections to be closer to the order one might read, and to make the index more visually appealing.
    * Fantastic Foundry no longer shows all tier 4 materials, instead using a tag to determine which ones show. Added by request from an addon adding an offshoot tier 4 for their own book, and to prepare for soul forge plans.
* Sub-sections:
    * Tool sections now have a separate column for ranged instead of mixing them with melee and harvest.
    * Slotless modifiers now have a new group "Cosmetic", to make it easier to find non-cosmetic slotless modifiers.
* Material pages:
    * Fishing rods are now the icon for balanced ranged materials instead of swashers.
    * Tools in material columns now show non-ancient tools that have any of the applicable stat types. For example, fishing rods can show on ranged and ammo.
    * Material sections now sort the materials to group applicable types together. For instance, bows group all the bowstring exclusives togther, and armor groups maille exlusives, cuirass, and shield cores.
* Rename impaling to arrow pierce to minimize confusion with vanilla impaling. Rename pierce to armor pierce to avoid confusion with vanilla pierce.
* Improve display of the add breath fluid effect module in the encyclopedia.
* Improve placement of effects on encyclopedia modifier pages.
* Books now can default to a different tool part than repair kits when the material is missing repair items. We use it for "fake ingots" for compatability materials.
* Fix various typos in books and language files.
* Fix odd wrapping on some modifier pages.
* Fix curiass exclusive materials not showing in the book.

## Data packs

* Material and tool traits now support setting `"optional": true` on modifier entries to suppress errors if the modifier is absent. Absent modifiers also will also no longer be added as tool traits. This should help addons with optional support for many mods implement mod specific logic in their traits.
* Added new "random material" type: `tconstruct:ancient`. Its just a preset of the standard settings for ancient tool materials.
* Teleport fluid effect now supports setting the teleportion range and attempts.
* Added tier 0, a new technical tier. Gameplay wise its the same as tier 1, but it ensures the material shows up before the rest of tier 1 for JEI's "first material" and other similar usages.
* JSON Loader Registries now support the new `mantle:conditional` which lets you change which object to use based on a JSON condition. When relevant, added reasonable defaults to `if_false` along with datagen helpers.
* Allow using datapack load conditions in station slot layouts.
* Fix crash from default materials module having more materials than the tool has parts. Still a bug to do so, but now it just errors instead of crash.

### Recipes

* Expanded `tconstruct:tinker_station_part_swapping` with a tool filter and a max stack size. Used to make ammo require a smaller size.
* Tool building recipe can now override the tool parts list, instead of pulling from the definition.
* Tool building recipe can now specify a list of materials to add after the parts, allowing a tool to have a material changed through other means later.
* Material melting recipes can now specify byproducts.
* Added option to create a part builder recipe that ignores the craftable property. Used for uncastable tool parts.
* Material casting recipes now support setting `allowed_materials` to filter the materials that may be crafted. Works for tool part casting, tool part composite, tool casting, and tool part swapping.
* Tool casting recipe has a new `cast_purpose` field allowing you to set the behavior of the cast:
    * `first_material`: makes the cast the first material and the fluid the second. Ideal when you want to also support part swapping.
    * `second_material`: makes the cast the second material and the fluid the first. Not currently used, but might be useful when both materials have parts.
    * `consumed`: cast is consumed without contributing to the tool materials. Ideal if you wanted to cast a tool using "sand casts".
    * `catalyst`: cast is not consumed and does not contribute to tool materials. Ideal if you wanted to cast a tool using "gold casts".
    * `maybe_material`: legacy behavior that guesses whether you want `first_material` or `consumed` based on tool definition part count. Will be removed in 1.21.
* Tool casting recipe also now has a `extra_materials` material variant list, which adds additional materials to the tool that are neither the fluid nor the cast. Lets you make something similar to how traveler's gear crafting works, but on casting.
* Tool crafting recipes using a single non-part input will now allow placing the input in any station or anvil slot.
* Improve material crafting recipes.
    * Original `tconstruct:crafting_shaped_material`:
        * Can output a tool part instead of just a tool, provided it has no extra materials.
        * Deprecated in favor of new formats below.
    * Added new material recipes for combining one or more materials into a tool or tool part.
        * Materials can be both from material recipes (e.g. ingots and blocks), or from tool parts.
        * `tconstruct:crafting_shaped_materials` specifies a list of ingredients which represent the tool parts. If each part is unique, will validate all occurances of the part match.
        * `tconstruct:crafting_shapeless_materials` specifies how many of the inputs represent the tool parts.

### Tags

* Items
  * Added item tag `tconstruct:modifiable/ranged/launcher` tag - contains any ranged weapons that launch a projectile. In other words, does not include javelins.
  * Added item tag `tconstruct:ammo` for arrows and shurikens. Mainly used in the book right now.
  * Added item tag `tconstruct:single_use`, makes the soulbound recipe cheaper and disables some other non-applicable recipes.
  * Added item tags `tconstruct:modifiable/ranged/small` and `tconstruct:modifiable/ranged/broad` tags, used instad of `tconstruct:modifiable/small` and `tconstruct:modifiable/broad` to put ranged tools in the right column.
* Added fluid tag `tconstruct:tooltips/bottle` for fluids with buckets, 250mb bottles, and sips.
* Modifier
  * Added modifier tag `tconstruct:slotless/cosmetic` for slotless modifiers that do not affect gameplay (such as dyed, trim and alike).
  * Added modifier tag `tconstruct:remove_blacklist` to prevent removing a modifier from tools with the recipe.
* Material
  * Added material tag `tconstruct:book/distant`. Any materials in this tag are hidden from the first 4 guidebooks and shown instead in Tinkers' Gadgetry, regardless of set tier.
  * Added material tag `tconstruct:book/blazing_blood`. Any materials in this tag are shown in Fantastic Foundry.
  * Added material tag `tconstruct:book/basic_ammo`. Any ammo materials in this tag are shown in Materials and You. Any ammo materials not in this tag are shown in Tinkers' Gadgetry.
  * Added material tag `tconstruct:nether/gated` to list materials that require nether access rather than simply being present in the nether. Currently unused.
* Entity
  * Added entity tag `tconstruct:reusable_ammo`, any projectiles with this tag will not be discarded by enderporting and alike.
  * Added entity tag `tconstruct:necrotic_blacklist` for mobs that should not heal you from necrotic, such as test dummies.
  * Added entity tag `tconstruct:damage_modifier_blacklist` for mobs that should not run melee modifiers in the damage event (like players).
* Fluid
  * Added fluid tag `tconstruct:swasher/drowned` for fluids that drowned swashers can spawn with.
  * Added fluid tag `tconstruct:swasher/wither_skeleton` for fluids that wither skeleton swashers can spawn with.
* Added potion tag `tconstruct:hide_in_fluid`, which contains `c:hidden_from_recipe_viewers` to allow hiding potions from our JEI potion fluid.
* Added damage type tag `tconstruct:modifier_whitelistlist` for damage sources that should run melee modifiers in the damage event.

### Modifier modules

* Added `tconstruct:conditional_power` modifier module for creating modifiers with power conditioned on the target. Note `tconstruct:conditional_stat` is still preferable for conditional power that does not need the extra context.
    * Used notably for Holy (from silver), along with Valiant (knightmetal) and Shock (electrum).
* Added `tconstruct:volatile_int` module to set an integer to volatile data on tool build. Can be given projectile launch hooks to apply an int to projectile data.
* `tconstruct:volatile_flag` now implements the projectile launch interfact, letting you use that hook to apply a flag to projectile data.
* Added a `tconstruct:has_persistent_key` and `tconstruct:has_volatile_key` tool predicates to check if a tool has the given key set.
* Added `sqrt` postfix operation as a shortcut for the equivelent power call.
* Added `tconstruct:water` entity variable. Returns 2 for entities in water and 1 for entities in rain.
* Added `tconstruct:material_variant_color`: changes display name color to match the first instance of the specified material. Used by wool.
* Added new specialized modules for fishing, throwing, projectiles placing glows, tool craft count, arrows bouncing, arrow pierce, spilling, smashing, minimap, quiver inventory, punch, and drawback.
* Thorns module now supports setting the damage type used against the attacker. Notably used for shock to deal electric damage (tagged as fire).
* Enderclearance module supports setting teleport range.
* Modifier requirements module now only runs on crafted modifiers by default, since running it on traits can be undesirable. Uses new `tconstruct:validate_upgrade` modifier hook, same as `tconstruct:validate` but runs on just modifiers from recipes.
* Added hook `tconstruct:monster_melee_damage`, variant of `tconstruct:melee_damage` for monsters boosting their melee damage from modifiers.
* Added hook `tconsturct:monster_melee_hit`, allows applying post-melee effects from a monster. Uses a different interface from `tconstruct:melee_hit` so will likely need extra logic.
* Fix `tconstruct:mob_effect` not properly checking modifier conditions. Note the projectile hit logic will only check modifier level condition.
* Fix partial levels incorrectly showing as "has modifier" for the relevant predicates (e.g. modifier requirements module).

#### Capacity modifier modules

* Migrated stoneshield, frostshield, and most of overslime to JSON.
* New capacity bar hook: allows modifier modules to interact with "capacity bars", which can store various bits of data.
* Added `tconstruct:capacity_bar` module for standard bar implementation storing in a NBT key.
* Added `tconstruct:durability_shield` which causes the tool to consume the bar before durability.
* Added `tconstruct:loot_to_capacity` which allows the tool to consume block drops to fill the bar.
* Added `tconstruct:damage_to_capacity` which allows the tool to fill the bar by you taking damage.
* Added `tconstruct:launch_capacity` which allows the tool to fill, drain, or reset the bar by firing arrows.
* Added `tconstruct:mining_capacity` which allows the tool to fill, drain, or reset the bar by mining blocks.
* Added `tconstruct:time_to_capacity` which allows the tool to fill capacity overtime like overgrowth.
* Added `tconstruct:durability-as_capacity` which allows other capacity modules to run against the durability bar.
* Added a tool variable `tconstruct:mod_data` to fetch the value of such capacity bar for conditional modifiers.

### Tool modules

* Added `tconstruct:toggleable_set_interaction` - allows setting some modifiers to right and some to left click, but toggling to the opposite of start. The new `tconstruct:toggle_interaction` worktable recipe handles this.
* Added `tconstruct:attack_interact`: moves all interactions to left click. Simpler way to do shield interaction behavior.

#### Tool Name

* New tool hook `tconstruct:display_name` allows configuring how the tool selects its name.
* Module `tconstruct:material_name`: standard material name with two variants:
   * `filter: all`: combines all materials to get the name.
   * `filter: repairable`: combines all materials with durability to get the name. Default behavior.
* Module `tconstruct:stat_types_name`: name is created from any parts matching the listed stat types.
* Module `tconstruct:fixed_material_name`: specified material index is used for name, regardless of type.
* Module `tconstruct:unique_material_name`: specified material index is used for a unique translation key. Used for slimeskulls.

### Mob equipment JSON

* New JSON format for swapping mob starting equipment for tinker tools.
* Used notably to let monsters spawn with ancient tools.
* Can also be used to swap any monster to spawning with tinkers tools. Just keep in mind ranged monsters like skeletons don't know how to use our bows.

## Resource packs

* Added new `tconstruct:frames` material sprite transformer. Takes a list of sprite transformers and uses one to generate each frame.
* Renamed UI textures for the tinker station, part builder, and modifier work table due to the large layout changes.
* Added `tconstruct:thrown` item display type to allow positioning thrown tools.
* Tool models can now set a boolean to show trait modifiers instead of just crafted modifiers.
* Remove several unused GUI textures.
* Non-wood shield cores look less plank-like.
* Fixed a few cases of misplaced padding with indexes.
* Fixed slight hue tint on plate maille armor model.
* Books
  * Tool pages in books now prefer showing the crafting table recipe over the tool part recipe, making travelers shield show better.
  * Book tag injecting transformer for books now supports pulling from multiple tags.
  * Added support for tier range material injectors to set a material predicate instead of a tag for the material filter.
* Added new model loader `tconstruct:material_block`.
    * Used for an elements style material model.
    * Can be used for tool parts, tools, and the tinkers anvil.
    * For more information, see [the model format](/docs/json/models/material#material-block) for more information).

## Json Things

* Added `tconstruct:arrow` item type to allow adding a custom arrow variant. Requires the tag `minecraft:arrows` to be usable in bows, but can instead apply `tconstruct:modifiable/ammo/thrown` to throw it on right click.
* Added `tconstruct:shuriken` item type to allow adding a custom shuriken variant.

## API

* Replaced menu tag `tconstruct:tool_inventory_replacements` with `mantle:replaceable`. Allows reusing the list for the new Mantle book helpers.
* Added new `CastingRecipeLookup` helper for fetching casting recipes from a map lookup.
    * Due to the way the map is built, creating instances of `ItemCastingRecipe` outside of recipe deserialization will corrupt the cache. Use `DisplayCastingRecipe` instead.
* Punch and knockback now use interfaces allowing custom projectiles to more easily receive the effects.
* Make methods from `ToolAttackUtil` for knockback handling public.
* Tools tagged melee primary now show melee stats before ranged stats.
* `ToolAttackUtil` now uses `ToolAttackContext.Builder` to reduce the many overloads for different parameter sets. Causes slight timing changes with a few hooks, and adds a bit more context to modifiers.
* `EntityModifierCapability` now has an add helper to ensure projectiles that already have modifiers are not overwritten.
* Allow creating a `FloatToolStat` using a general `ItemPredicate`.
* Ensure tool validates from tool building recipe (#5493).
* Default slot for anything tagged as `tconstruct:modifiable/armor/held` is now the offhand. Previously was just shields, but now things like melting pans and staffs are included.
* Added `ModifierUtil.disableShield` to disable the shield of a target entity. Use `ModifeirUtil.registerShieldDisabler` to register logic for an entity type of how to disable shields.
* Added `ProjectileWithPower` and `ProjectileWithKnockback` interfaces to allow a custom projectile to recieve power/knockback from modifiers.
* Added `ModifierUtils#updateFishingRod` to handle a projectile damaging and causing cooldown on its fishing rod.
* Added `IMaterialItem#setMaterial` and `IMaterialItem#setMaterialForced` to modify an existing item stack's material.
* Fix left click block hook running twice per click.
* Fix removing trick quiver modifier leaving behind unused NBT.
* Fix some types of tool NBT changes not updating the capability properly.
* Fix material recipe cache not fully clearing on reload.
* Fix potential dupe bug with stacked tools with fluid handlers. Mostly would have affected daggers before, but now might affect arrows and shurikens.
* Fix arrow entity modifiers not syncing to client.

### Modifier hooks

* Added `tconstruct:launcher_hit`: run when a fishing rod reels in an entity or block.
* Projectile hit:
  * Added `tconstruct:projectile_hit_client`: run client side when a projectile hits an entity. Will be merged into `tconstruct:projectile_hit` come 1.21.
  * Projectile hit block hook now supports canceling like it did in 1.19.
  * Projectile hit on entities now by default is not called when the entity blocks with a shield. You can opt-in to run even when they are blocking.
* Added `tconstruct:projectile_thrown`: works like `tconstruct:projectile_launch`, but for throwing/ballista. Useful when a behavior is not applicable to non-arrow type weapons.
* Added `tconstruct:projectile_shot`: works like `tconstruct:projectile_launch`, but for the modifiable arrow, receiving the arrow stack. Lets the arrow decide its own behavior, but lacks direct access to the bow that fires it.
* Added `tconstruct:craft_count`: run to change the number of tools crafted. Useful mainly for arrows.
* Added `tconstruct:schedule_projectile_task`: allows scheduling tasks to run a specific amount of ticks after a projectile is launched. Works on modifiable arrows, shurikens, throwing axes, and thrown melee weapons.
* `BreakSpeedModifierHook` now has a new method `modifyBreakSpeed` that is called with a `BreakSpeedContext` instead of a `PlayerEvent.BreakSpeed`. This makes it easier to call the hook from contexts beyond the event, such as thrown tools. Old method `onBreakSpeed` should continue to work, though will be removed come 1.21.
* `ToolHarvestContext` is now aware when the mining was caused by a projectile.

### Datagen

* `SmelteryRecipeBuilder` has some new helpers for working with byproducts of the ingot/nugget/block form, plus new helpers for less common metal shapes.
* `CostTagAppender` now supports using a fluid name directly, instead of requiring a fluid object instance.
* Material traits data provider now supports calling an add method multiple times to build a larger list. It also has new builder syntax you can use instead of a bunch of dedicated methods.
* Fix being unable to datagen conditional material redirects.