---
layout: post
title:  "Second Tinkers 1.20 Alpha and Tinkers' Things Update"
date:   2025-01-20 4:00:00 -0400
categories: posts
author: KnightMiner
update_images: tinkers/3.9.1
---
Tinkers' Construct just had its second alpha released for 1.20.1. Its mostly bug fixes and cleanup, but has a few cool new features.
This alpha mostly stablizes the API, but we are not quite ready to call it stable enough for beta. We did however update Tinkers' Things to 1.20.1 taking advantage of the mostly stable API.

This alpha should be mostly API stable; most public APIs used by addons should be stable, but there is still a chance some of the internal APIs that addons sometimes use may change, so some authors may still wish to hold off. The main changes planned are related to spitting and some smeltery features. I also plan to keep the JSON format stable from this point out; just adding new features. Check out the [the update primer]({% post_url 2024-12-31-1.20-update-primer %}) for a guide on updating.

If you are a modpack maker, note that this new release is an alpha, so we ask you only include it in a modpack if you plan to continue to support your modpack for the next couple of months while we finish stabilizing this release.

{% include toc.html %}

{% include update/start.html %}

## Swasher

{% include update/image.html name="swasher" alt="A drowned holding a swasher." %}

Swashers are a new ancient tool, found in buried treasure, shipwrecks, drowned, and fishing. They are a cross between a sword and a fluid pistol, able to fire any fluids from our fluid effect registry.

## Trim Materials

{% include update/image.html name="trim-materials" alt="Applying queens slime to tinkers armor." %}

Tinkers' Construct now provides many new armor trim materials, including:
* Alloys: Amethyst Bronze, Pig Iron, Rose Gold & Pig Iron
* Nether Materials: Cobalt, Queens Slime, Manyullyn & Hepatizon
* Slime: Earthslime, Skyslime, Ichor, & Enderslime

In addition, we have improved our support for other mods trim materials, which should minimize the number of combos that show missing textures.

## Netherite Template

{% include update/image.html name="netherite-template" alt="Crafting netherite using a smithing template." %}

The netherite modifier now requires a netherite smithing template to apply, for consistency with vanilla. To make up for this, the modifier no longer requires applying diamond or emerald to apply, allowing you to jump to netherite for 1 upgrade slot.

## Texture Updates

{% include update/image.html name="new-textures" ext="gif" alt="Showcasing the melting pan charge animation." %}

Several newer features got improved textures thanks to our artist RCXcrafter; notably includes the melting pan, tough collar, and plate armor, plus some tweaks to various tool and part textures.

{% include update/image.html name="plate-armor" alt="New plate armor item textures." %}

## Tool Part Trait Tooltip

{% include update/image.html name="trait-descriptions" alt="Trait descriptions on a tool part when holding control." %}

Holding control while looking at the tooltip for a tool part now shows trait descriptions; making it easier to view them in JEI alongside the modifier descriptions already visible.

## Better Obsidian Alloying

{% include update/image.html name="water-obsidian" alt="Alloying obsidian without spending water." %}

Alloying obsidian no longer consumes the water, provided there is a minimum 250mb of water. This both makes nether starts a bit more pleasant (replacing the previous weird alternative obsidian recipe), but also provides a new API for alloying recipes with catalysts for addons.

## Configurable Solid Fuel Temperature

{% include update/image.html name="solid-speed" alt="Showing the speed of solid fuel." %}

Speaking of datapack features, the speed and temperature of solid fuel using the heater is now controlled in JSON, allowing modpack makers to change how the heater gate works. Note this is not an option to change specific items to have different heat values, just one JSON for all solid fuels; if you want to have variable values use liquids.

Speaking of liquids, liquid fuels also gained the new feature to specify a rate separate from the temperature, allowing creation of fast fuels with low temperatures or slow fuels with high temperatures.

## Download

### Mantle

Update to the latest Mantle 1.11.36 for 1.20.1:

{% include update/download.html name="mantle" version="1.11.36" curseforge="6105891" %}

### Tinkers' Construct
<div class="hatnote">We released the hotfix 3.9.1.19 to fix an issue with projectiles on NeoForge.</div>

Download Tinkers' Construct 3.9.1.19 for 1.20.1 at the following links:

{% include update/download.html name="tinkers-construct" github="TinkersConstruct" version="3.9.1.19" curseforge="6111032" %}

### Tinkers' Things

Download the new Tinkers' Things update for 1.20.1:

{% include update/download.html name="tinkers-things-json" github="TinkersThings" modrinth="tinkers-things" version="1.3.0" curseforge="6105999" %}