---
layout: post
title:  "Tinkers 1.20 Addon Update Primer"
categories: posts
author: KnightMiner
---

This post is a guide for Tinkers' Construct addon authors to update to the latest API in 1.20. This only covers information specific to Tinkers' Construct; for general information see the following mod migration primers from ChampionAsh5357:

* [1.19.2 to 1.19.3](https://gist.github.com/ChampionAsh5357/c21724bafbc630da2ed8899fe0c1d226)
* [1.19.3 to 1.19.4](https://gist.github.com/ChampionAsh5357/163a75e87599d19ee6b4b879821953e8)
* [1.19.4 to 1.20.1](https://gist.github.com/ChampionAsh5357/cf818acc53ffea6f4387fe28c2977d56)

{% include toc.html %}

## Java

### Class renames

* `TinkerTransformTypes` was renamed to `TinkerItemDisplays`.
* `TinkerHooks` was renamed earlier in 1.19 to `ModifierHooks`.

### Class and method removals

* `TableBlockItem`/`RetexturedBlockItem` were removed as they are no longer needed. Just use a standard `BlockItem`/`TooltipBlockItem`. All the block items did was creative tab filling which now exists outside the item instance.
* Many classes had their friendly byte buffer read/write methods or their JSON serialize/deserialize methods removed. If that happened, they typically have a static field named `LOADER` or `LOADABLE` which can be used for those operations. Similarly, many methods from `JsonUtils` are removed as they have an equivelent in the `Loadable` API.
* `InventoryModifier` and `InventoryMenuModifier` were replaced with `InventoryModule` and `InventoryMenuModule`.
* Many modifier fields were removed from `TinkerModifiers`, they are likely in `ModifierIds`

### ArmorSlotType -> ArmorItem.Type

`ArmorSlotType` was an enum listing all 4 armor types (helmet, chestplate, leggings, and boots). In 1.20, Mojang created a nearly identical enum called `ArmorItem.Type`.

The main difference between these two enums is Mojang ordered the types top down (helmet to boots), while our original enum was bottom up (boots to helmet). Any loops using `ArmorSlotType#TOP_DOWN` can simply use `ArmorItem.Type#values()`, while if you need to loop in the other order that will require your own list.

The ordering notably affected `SetStatsModule.ArmorBuilder#setEach` as the constructor now receives slots in the opposite order (meaning using the default constructors you now list values top down instead of bottom up). To nudge addon authors of the change, we renamed the method to `SetStatsModule.ArmorBuilder#setInOrder` and updating the docs accordingly. Your JSON for your tool definition shouldn't change when you run updated datagen.

Utilities under `ArmorSlotType` were relocated:

* `ArmorSlotType.ArmorBuilder` -> `ArmorModuleBuilder`
* `ArmorSlotType.ArmorShieldBuilder` -> `ArmorModuleBuilder.ArmorShieldModuleBuilder`
* `ArmorSlotType#MAX_DAMAGE_ARRAY` -> `ArmorModuleBuilder#MAX_DAMAGE_ARRAY`, though indices are now top down instead of bottom up.
* `ArmorSlotType#SHIELD_DAMAGE` -> `ArmorModuleBuilder#SHIELD_DAMAGE`.


## Data Packs

### Modifier Serializer Removal

Modifier serializers have now been fully removed in favor of modifier modules. The modifier JSON syntax now requires the type to be "composable", meaning it gets the full module loader. All functionality that was previously in a modifier serializer exists in a modifier module.

If you are a modder who previously wrote a modifier serializer, it is very simple to migrate to a module; you basically implement the same interfaces plus `ModifierModule`, using any object (including a record) as the base class. If you were relying on a specific class with a `DynamicModifier` with a type filter, that is no longer possible; instead make use of a custom `ModuleHook` implemented by a custom module for the required behavior.

### Damage Predicates

[Damage predicates](/docs/json/predicates#damage-predicates) got significantly reworked due to Mojang [migrating most fields to tags](https://gist.github.com/ChampionAsh5357/163a75e87599d19ee6b4b879821953e8#damgetype-and-damagesources). As a result, many simple damage predicates have been moved to tag predicates. See the relevant doc for available predicates.

### Damage Fluid Effect

[Damage fluid effects](/docs/json/fluid-effects#damage) now contain an object `damage_type` containing fields `melee` and `ranged` to apply behavior to the damage dealt by the fluid. The fields refer to the IDs of two [damage types](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Damage_type) used for melee and ranged fluid attacks respectively. Behaviors that were previously added in this JSON are now added via [damage type tags](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Tag#Damage_type_tags).

This change is made as the recent [changes to damage sources](https://gist.github.com/ChampionAsh5357/163a75e87599d19ee6b4b879821953e8#damgetype-and-damagesources) means damage type tags are the only way to apply these behaviors. They also provide much greater flexibility.

### Removed explosion knockback armor stat

The armor stat `tconstruct:explosion_knockback` was removed (usable notably in module types `tconstruct:armor_stat` and `tconstruct:max_armor_stat`) in favor of the vanila enchantment which was recently fixed. The handler was a pretty large hack so its more efficient to remove it (plus Mojang will add an attribute with the same behavior come 1.21).

This armor stat was added late in 1.19.2 so this change is unlikely to affect many mods.

### Part Chest Items

The part chest no longer holds all items that extend `IMaterialItem`. Instead, you must add items to the item tag `tconstruct:chest_parts`. All items under `tconstruct:parts` are automatically added to this tag (which you should be tagging your tool parts as anyways).

## Resource Packs

### Modifier Icon Stitching

Modifier icons no longer automatically stitch any texture path passed in. Minecraft will automatically stitch all sprites in `textures/item` and `textures/block` folders, and Tinkers' Construct additionally adds `textures/gui/modifiers` for use with modifier icons. If you wish to place icons in any other directory you must stitch it using the [atlas JSON](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Atlas).

## Mantle

### Book command suggestions

It is no longer necessary to register your book IDs with the Mantle command suggestions as the command is now a client command (meaning it can use the client book listing).